docs(gatewayapi): fix and adjust gateway api documentation (#1738)
kumahq/kuma-website: app/_src/using-mesh/managing-ingress-traffic/gateway-api.md

## Installation

{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}
{% warning %}
{{ site.mesh_product_name }}'s [Kubernetes Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) implementation is beta.
{% endwarning %}
{% warning %}
Gateway API [`Gateways`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/) aren't supported in multi-zone. To use the builtin Gateway, you need to use the [`MeshGateway` resources](/docs/{{ page.version }}/using-mesh/managing-ingress-traffic/builtin-listeners).
{% endwarning %}

1. Install the Gateway API CRDs.

>    Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API CRDs by default. To install them follow the [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API CRDs, [install them from the standard channel CRD bundle.](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).
```

and below of course.

>    Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API functionality by default. To use it, you'll need to install the CRDs first. Instructions: [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).

Reviewer 2: nitpick: to not duplicate this in line 30 everything above this could be inside `{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}` and start another block with `{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}` after this line.

Author: Then we would end with a numbered list containing only one element which I want to avoid

Reviewer 2: why? we don't have to have the numbered item in the if, right? anyway, just a nitpick

>    Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API functionality by default. To use it, you'll need to install the CRDs first. Instructions: [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway CRDs by default. To use it, you'll need to install the CRDs first. Instructions: [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).
```

2. Enable Gateway API support.

   - With `kumactl`, use the `--experimental-gatewayapi` flag.
   - With Helm, use the `{{site.set_flag_values_prefix}}experimental.gatewayAPI=true` value.
{% endif_version %}
{% if_version gte:2.7.x %}

> Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API CRDs by default. To install them follow the [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).

Author: ```suggestion
Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API CRDs, [install them from the standard channel CRD bundle](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).
```

> Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API functionality by default. To use it, you'll need to install the CRDs first. Instructions: [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes doesn't include Gateway API CRDs by default. To install them follow the [Installing Gateway API Standard Channel](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#install-standard-channel).
```

and then reference it in your `Gateway`:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: kuma
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: kuma-cross-mesh
  listeners:
  - name: proxy
    port: 8080
    protocol: HTTP
```

### Multi-zone Deployments

{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}
Gateway API isn't supported with multi-zone deployments, use {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s [`MeshGateways`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/using-mesh/managing-ingress-traffic/builtin-listeners)/[`MeshHTTPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshhttproute)/
[`MeshTCPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshtcproute) instead.
{% endif_version %}
{% if_version gte:2.7.x %}
The Gateway API supports multi-zone deployments, but with some limitations:

> - Gateway API resources like `Gateway`, `ReferenceGrant`, and `HTTPRoute` must be created in non-global zones. They are kubernetes resources and therefore are not known to {{ site.mesh_product_name }}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gateway API resources like `Gateway`, `ReferenceGrant`, and `HTTPRoute` must be created in non-global zones}. They also don't appear directly in the {{ site.mesh_product_name }} GUI, only the {{ site.mesh_product_name }} resources they manage do.
```

Not sure what they are "not known to Kuma" means?

Author: I actually removed this sentence as it didn't make sense to me anymore.

> - Only services deployed within the same Kubernetes cluster, such as the `HTTPRoute`, can be referenced as the `backendRef`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only services deployed within the same Kubernetes cluster, such as the `HTTPRoute`, can be referenced via `backendRef`.
```

and then reference it in your `Gateway`:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: kuma
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: kuma-cross-mesh
  listeners:
    - name: proxy
      port: 8080
      protocol: HTTP
```

### Multi-zone Deployments

{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}
Gateway API isn't supported with multi-zone deployments, use {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s [`MeshGateways`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/using-mesh/managing-ingress-traffic/builtin-listeners)/[`MeshHTTPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshhttproute)/
[`MeshTCPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshtcproute) instead.
{% endif_version %}
{% if_version gte:2.7.x %}

> Gateway API supports multi-zone deployments with some limitations.
> 
> #### Important Considerations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Gateway API supports multi-zone deployments, but with some limitations:
```

- Gateway API resources like `Gateway`, `ReferenceGrant`, and `HTTPRoute` must be created in non-global zones. They are specific to the zone they reside in.

> - Only services deployed within the same kubernetes cluster as the `HTTPRoute` can be referenced as the `backendRef`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Only services deployed within the same Kubernetes cluster, such as the `HTTPRoute`, can be referenced as the `backendRef`.
```

{% capture backendref-limitation %}
{% tip %}
This is temporary limitation, which will be lifted when [work on allowing targeting {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s `MeshService`s in `backendRef`](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/9894) will be completed.
{% endtip %}
{% endcapture %}
{{ backendref-limitation | indent }}

>    **Scenario:**
>    
>    Imagine you have two zones (`zone-1` in one kubernetes cluster and `zone-2` separate one) with a service named `backend` deployed in each zone and service `db` deployed only in `zone-1`. Here's what happens:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here's an example scenario that describes how you could configure multi-zone deployments with the Gateway API. In this example, you have the following resources:
* Two zones:
  * `zone-1` is in a Kubernetes cluster
  * `zone-2` is in a separate Kubernetes cluster
*  Two services:
  * A service named `backend` deployed in each zone 
  * A service named `db` deployed only in `zone-1`

If you deploy multi-zone with Gateway API, the following will occur:
```

>    - If you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` targeting the backend service in `zone-1`, it will only route traffic to the `backend` service within `zone-1`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - If you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` targeting the backend service in `zone-1`, it will only route traffic to the `backend` service in `zone-1`.
```

>    - Similarly, if you create an `HTTPRoute` in zone-2 with a `backendRef` pointing to the `db` service, it will result in `HTTPRoute` with a `ResolvedRefs` status condition of `BackendNotFound` because service `db` is not present in `zone-1`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Similarly, if you create an `HTTPRoute` in `zone-2` with a `backendRef` pointing to the `db` service, it will result in a `HTTPRoute` with a `ResolvedRefs` status condition of `BackendNotFound` because service `db` is not present in `zone-1`.
```

> {% endif_version %}

Reviewer 4: A couple other edits you could make:

- I think adding a Mermaid diagram that visually shows how the deployment scenario would look might help users understand it better.
- The other sections had an example yaml configuration, I think having something similar that users could look at and copy/paste to make their own would be helpful.
- I might be wrong, but it sounds like the example scenario you described is an example where the deployment isn't working correctly/as expected. Could we add another example, especially with an example yaml of a recommended configuration where things would work correctly/as expected so that users can see how they should be configuring this? TL;DR, it might be good to explain what to do in addition to what not to do.

Reviewer 3: +1 to mermaid diagram!

Also can we make this work by using a service with `ExternalName` https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#externalname ?

Author: > Also can we make this work by using a service with `ExternalName` https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#externalname ?

Unfortunately not:
> ExternalName services can refer to CNAME DNS records that may live outside of the cluster and as such are difficult to reason about in terms of conformance. They also may not be safe to forward to (see CVE-2021-25740 for more information). Implementations SHOULD NOT support ExternalName Services.
>
> ref. https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.BackendObjectReference

Reviewer 2: > I might be wrong, but it sounds like the example scenario you described is an example where the deployment isn't working correctly/as expected. Could we add another example, especially with an example yaml of a recommended configuration where things would work correctly/as expected so that users can see how they should be configuring this? 

I don't think this part was addressed yet, right @bartsmykla ?

Author: It works as expected, but it might be confusing, as in Gateway API scenario we are operating on kubernetes resources, not ours.

Author: I changed the wording a little bit, should be better now

[`MeshTCPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshtcproute) instead.
{% endif_version %}
{% if_version gte:2.7.x %}
The Gateway API supports multi-zone deployments, but with some limitations:

- Gateway API resources like `Gateway`, `ReferenceGrant`, and `HTTPRoute` must be created in non-global zones. They are specific to the zone they reside in.
- Only services deployed within the same Kubernetes cluster, such as the `HTTPRoute`, can be referenced as the `backendRef`.

{% capture backendref-limitation %}
{% tip %}
This is a temporary limitation, which will be lifted when [work on allowing targeting {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s `MeshService`s in `backendRef`](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/9894) is completed.
{% endtip %}
{% endcapture %}
{{ backendref-limitation | indent }}

Here's an example scenario that describes how you could configure multi-zone deployments with the Gateway API. In this example, you have the following resources:
* Two zones (`zone-1` and `zone-2`) in separate Kubernetes clusters

> *  Two services:

Author: ```suggestion
* Two services:
```

and then reference it in your `Gateway`:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: kuma
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: kuma-cross-mesh
  listeners:
    - name: proxy
      port: 8080
      protocol: HTTP
```

### Multi-zone Deployments

{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}
Gateway API isn't supported with multi-zone deployments, use {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s [`MeshGateways`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/using-mesh/managing-ingress-traffic/builtin-listeners)/[`MeshHTTPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshhttproute)/
[`MeshTCPRoute`](/docs/{{ page.version }}/policies/meshtcproute) instead.
{% endif_version %}
{% if_version gte:2.7.x %}
The Gateway API supports multi-zone deployments, but with some limitations:

- Gateway API resources like `Gateway`, `ReferenceGrant`, and `HTTPRoute` must be created in non-global zones. They are specific to the zone they reside in.
- Only services deployed within the same Kubernetes cluster, such as the `HTTPRoute`, can be referenced as the `backendRef`.

{% capture backendref-limitation %}
{% tip %}

> This is temporary limitation, which will be lifted when [work on allowing targeting {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s `MeshService`s in `backendRef`](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/9894) will be completed.

Reviewer 2: nitpick:

```suggestion
This is a temporary limitation, which will be lifted when [work on allowing targeting {{site.mesh_product_name}}'s `MeshService`s in `backendRef`](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/9894) is completed.
```

{% endtip %}
{% endcapture %}
{{ backendref-limitation | indent }}

Here's an example scenario that describes how you could configure multi-zone deployments with the Gateway API. In this example, you have the following resources:

> * Two zones:
>   * `zone-1` is in a Kubernetes cluster
>   * `zone-2` is in a separate Kubernetes cluster

Reviewer 2: so both of them are in separate cluster right? (a bit confusing that only in `zone-2` you mention that it's in a separate cluster) so maybe:

```suggestion
* Two zones (`zone-1` and `zone-2`) in separate Kubernetes clusters
```

?

            end
            subgraph Gateway
                listener(:8080)
            end
            subgraph HTTPRoute
                route1(/)
            end
            route1--"❌"-->backend2
            linkStyle 0 stroke:red,color:red,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
            route1-->backend1
            listener-->route1
        end
    end
{% endmermaid %}
{% endcapture %}

{% capture gapi_multizone_limitation_2 %}
{% mermaid %}
flowchart TD
    subgraph c2["k8s-cluster-2"]
        subgraph z2["zone-2"]
            subgraph c1z2s1["Service"]
                backend2(backend)
            end
            subgraph c1z2s2["Service"]
                db(db)
            end
        end
    end
    subgraph c1["k8s-cluster-1"]
        subgraph z1["zone-1"]
            subgraph Gateway
                listener(:8080)
            end
            subgraph HTTPRoute
                route1(/)
            end
            subgraph Service
                backend1(backend)
            end
            route1--"❌"-->db
            linkStyle 0 stroke:red,color:red,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
            listener-->route1
        end
    end
{% endmermaid %}
{% endcapture %}

>    - If in `k8s-cluster-1` you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` targeting the `backend` service, it will only route traffic to the `backend` service in `k8s-cluster-1`.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be

```suggestion
   - If you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` targeting the `backend` service in `k8s-cluster-1`, it will only route traffic to the `backend` service in `k8s-cluster-1`.
```

     
     {{ gapi_multizone_limitation_1 | indent }}

>    - Similarly, if in `k8s-cluster-1` you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` pointing to the `db` service, it will result in a `HTTPRoute` with a `ResolvedRefs` status condition of `BackendNotFound` because service `db` is not present in `k8s-cluster-1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Similarly, if you create an `HTTPRoute` with a `backendRef` pointing to the `db` service in `k8s-cluster-1`, it will result in a `HTTPRoute` with a `ResolvedRefs` status condition of `BackendNotFound` because service `db` is not present in `k8s-cluster-1`.
```

GAMMA is a Gateway API subproject focused on mesh implementations of Gateway API
and extending the Gateway API resources to mesh use cases.

{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}
{% warning %}

> GAMMA in {{site.mesh_product_name}} is **experimental**!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GAMMA in {{site.mesh_product_name}} is **experimental**!
```

Is it? Maybe beta?

Author: It's wrapped in `{% if_version lte:2.6.x %}` block, so <= 2.6.x it's `experimental` >= 2.7.0 it's not

Reviewer: Ah right, why change the message at all? Or at least maybe make it clear that at the time, GAMMA was also not yet GA?

Reviewer: I guess in this case I would prefer that when looking at the docs for an older version I would see that the implementation, in that version, is for an experimental spec.

Reviewer: But not a big deal
